[extras] `<CSM>` Prototype (#677)
threlte/threlte: apps/docs/src/content/reference/extras/csm.mdx

---
{
  order: 5,
  category: '@threlte/extras',
  name: <CSM>,
  sourcePath: 'packages/extras/src/lib/components/CSM/CSM.svelte',
  type: 'component',
  'componentSignature':
    {
      'props':
        [
          { name: 'enabled', type: 'boolean', required: false },
          { name: 'camera', type: 'THREE.Camera | undefined', required: false },

>           { name: 'configure', type: '(csm: CSM) => CSM', required: false },

Author: ```suggestion
          { name: 'configure', type: '(csm: CSM) => void', required: false },
```

>           { name: 'params', type: 'CSMParameters', required: false }

Author: ```suggestion
          { name: 'args', type: 'CSMParameters', required: false }
```

        ]
    }
}
---

The `<CSM/>` component offers a streamlined convenience integration of the Cascaded Shadow Maps technique, sourced from the Three.js addon.

<Example path="extras/csm" />

Cascaded Shadow Maps (CSM) are a technique employed to render shadows with varying levels of
detail based on their distance from the camera. CSMs utilize multiple shadow maps to produce
higher resolution shadows closer to the camera and gradually decrease this resolution for
shadows farther away. This method is especially beneficial when rendering sun-cast
shadows over vast terrains, ensuring detailed and performance-optimized shadow renderings.

## Usage

```svelte
<script lang="ts">

>   import { useThrelte } from '@threlte/core'

Author: ```suggestion
```

  import { CSM } from '@threlte/extras'

>   import { PCFSoftShadowMap, Vector3 } from 'three'

Author: ```suggestion
  import { Vector3 } from 'three'
```

> 
>   const { renderer } = useThrelte()
> 
>   const params = {
>     lightDirection: new Vector3()
>   }
> 
>   renderer.shadowMap.enabled = true
>   renderer.shadowMap.type = PCFSoftShadowMap

Author: ```suggestion
```

</script>

<CSM
  enabled

>   {params}

Author: ```suggestion
  args={{
    lightDirection: new Vector3()
  }}
```

>
  <!-- Your scene goes here -->
</CSM>
```

> To enable CSM, it's essential to set `renderer.shadowMap.enabled` to `true`,
> which can be done via renderer.shadowMap.enabled = true.

Author: This is the default, so I'd say change it to:

```suggestion
For CSM to work, shadow maps must be enabled. Threlte does this by default. Be sure to _not_ disable shadowmaps by [`<Canvas shadows={false}>`](/docs/reference/core/canvas#component-signature).
```

Then, wrap all of the objects that you wish to use CSM on (typically your entire scene) with the `<CSM>` component.
Making a CSM wrapper, as demonstrated in our example, is recommended, particularly for more advanced configurations.

> Making a wrapper nested inside of `<Canvas>`, enables the use of Threlte hooks, such as `useThrelte`.

Author: Hm, what is the benefit here?

Internally, the `<CSM>` component modifies the shader code of all materials inside the component.
Currently, support is limited only to `THREE.MeshStandardMaterial` and `THREE.MeshPhongMaterial`.

<Tip type="warning">Setting `castShadow` property on any lights in a scene with `<CSM>` enabled leads to crashes.</Tip>

## CSM Parameters

The `<CSM>` component exposes an optional `params` prop. Parameters are not reactive
and are only updated when CSM is enabled.

### Updating light direction

> To modify the light's direction, utilize the `lightDirection` param,

Author: ```suggestion
To modify the light's direction, utilize the `lightDirection` parameter,
```

which should be of the type `THREE.Vector3`. After setting this parameter, any subsequent

> adjustments should be made directly to this vector. Light direction vector hast o be normalized.

Author: ```suggestion
adjustments should be made directly to this vector. The light direction vector hast to be normalized.
```

### Parameters explained

| Name                 | Type                                                                                   | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| -------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | camera               | `THREE.Camera`                                                                         | Camera which is currently used for rendering.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

Author: ```suggestion
| camera               | `THREE.Camera`                                                                         | Camera which is currently used for rendering, defaults to the camera set via `makeDefault`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
```

> | parent               | `THREE.Object3D`                                                                       | `THREE.Object3D` where lights will be stored                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

Author: ```suggestion
| parent               | `THREE.Object3D`                                                                       | `THREE.Object3D` where lights will be stored.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
```

| cascades             | number                                                                                 | Number of shadow cascades.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |

> | maxFar               | number                                                                                 | Frustum far plane distance (i.e. shadows are not visible farther this distance from camera). May be smaller than `camera.far value.`                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

Author: ```suggestion
| maxFar               | number                                                                                 | Frustum far plane distance (i.e. shadows are not visible farther this distance from camera). May be smaller than `camera.far` value.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
```

> | mode                 | `"uniform" \| "logarithmic" \| "practical" \| "custom"`                                | Defines a split scheme (how large frustum is splitted into smaller ones). Can be uniform (linear), logarithmic, practical or custom. For most cases practical may be the best choice. Equations used for each scheme can be found in [GPU Gems 3. Chapter 10.](https://developer.nvidia.com/gpugems/GPUGems3/gpugems3_ch10.html) If mode is set to custom, you'll need to define your own `customSplitsCallback` |

Author: ```suggestion
| mode                 | `"uniform" \| "logarithmic" \| "practical" \| "custom"`                                | Defines a split scheme (~ how the large frustum is splitted into smaller ones). Can be `'uniform'`(linear), `'logarithmic'`, `'practical'` or `'custom'`. For most cases `'practical'` may be the best choice. Equations used for each scheme can be found in [GPU Gems 3. Chapter 10.](https://developer.nvidia.com/gpugems/GPUGems3/gpugems3_ch10.html) If mode is set to `'custom'`, you'll need to define your own `customSplitsCallback` |
```

> | shadowMapSize        | number                                                                                 | Resolution of shadow maps (one per cascade)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

Author: ```suggestion
| shadowMapSize        | number                                                                                 | Resolution of shadow maps (one per cascade).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
```

| lightDirection       | `THREE.Vector3`                                                                        | Normalized `THREE.Vector3`                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| lightIntensity       | number                                                                                 | Same as `THREE.DirectionalLight.intensity`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

> | lightNear            | number                                                                                 | Shadow camera frustum near plane                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

Author: ```suggestion
| lightNear            | number                                                                                 | Shadow camera frustum near plane.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
```

> | lightFar             | number                                                                                 | Shadow camera frustum far plane                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

Author: ```suggestion
| lightFar             | number                                                                                 | Shadow camera frustum far plane.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
```

> | lightMargin          | number                                                                                 | Defines how far shadow camera is moved along z axis in cascade frustum space. The larger is the value the more space `LightShadow` will be able to cover. Should be set to high values for scenes with huge objects.                                                                                                                                                                                             |

Author: ```suggestion
| lightMargin          | number                                                                                 | Defines how far the shadow camera is moved along the z-axis in cascade frustum space. The larger the value is, the more space `LightShadow` will be able to cover. Should be set to a higher values for larger scenes.                                                                                                                                                                                             |
```

> | customSplitsCallback | `(cascades: number, cameraNear: number, cameraFar: number, breaks: number[]) => void;` | A callback to compute custom cascade splits when mode is set to `"custom"`. Callback should accept three number parameters: `cascadeCount`, `nearDistance`, `farDistance` and return an array of split distances ranging from 0 to 1, where 0 is equal to `nearDistance` and 1 is equal to `farDistance`.                                                                                                        |

Author: ```suggestion
| customSplitsCallback | `(cascades: number, cameraNear: number, cameraFar: number, breaks: number[]) => void;` | A callback to compute custom cascade splits when `mode` is set to `'custom'`. The callback should accept three number parameters: `cascadeCount`, `nearDistance`, `farDistance` and return an array of split distances ranging from 0 to 1, where 0 is equal to `nearDistance` and 1 is equal to `farDistance`.                                                                                                        |
```

> For the original implementation, refer to [this github repository](https://github.com/StrandedKitty/three-csm).

Author: This is confusing, since the implementation is slightly different. 

```suggestion
For the original implementation, refer to [the Three.js GitHub repository](https://github.com/mrdoob/three.js/blob/dev/examples/jsm/csm/CSM.js).
```

## Custom configuration

> The `<CSM>` component offers a configure callback, which is triggered when CSM is activated.

Author: ```suggestion
The `<CSM>` component offers a configuration callback, which is triggered when CSM is activated.
```

This callback facilitates advanced configurations, such as enabling the fade feature.

```svelte
<CSM
  configure={(csm) => {
    // advanced CSM configuration can be handle here. configure has to return csm
    csm.fade = true

>     return csm

Author: There's actually no need to return csm here

```suggestion
```
